>> Evgenii Ray: Now let's understand
how the browsers utilize the GPU.
So the old browsers used only
the CPU to render the page, but
the new browsers use CPU and GPU together
in parallel to optimize the rendering.
And let's now understand how
the GPU is used via the browser.
So would render four boxes here.
Each box is absolutely positioned and
slightly moved on top of each other.
And here's our html tree.
So apparently, for the browser to
optimize the html for the GPU rendering,
it needs to have some kind of rendering
tree representation which is GPU aware so
the browser constructs
their render object tree.
So where for each DOM element,
we create a new render object.
And as you can see, it's just one-to-one
copy, but they have completely different
properties that the DOM element contains
all the information about html, or
all its properties.
While the Render Objects knows
how to draw this element
on the bitmap using the graphical context,
which is passed from the top.
And as you can see, so the GPU is
good at rendering many things, but
if we imagine that every render object
is responsible for drawing itself
on the page, it doesn't look like
a very optimized way to use the GPU.
So that's why there is additional
concept called Render Layer.
So the Render Layer is constructed when
we actually use the position relative or
absolute.
So when we move elements to the stacking
context, so basically create a new layer.
Also, it's constructed for
the root element, so
we always need to have a root
layer where we render the things.
And when we utilize some accelerated
context like Canvas or CSS filters.
And let's try to construct
the Render Layer.
So if we take the first html
Render Object, we'll see that because it's
the root element, the first root
Render Layer will be constructed.
But then we have the body and
the main tag.
Because the body and the main
doesn't have any special properties,
this Rendering Objects will be
assigned to the root Render Layer.
And now let's move on to
these four divs element.
So, because each of these div
element is positioned absolutely,
this means that we need to promote these
objects to separate Render Layers.
So that's why we created
a new four Rendering Layers.
And also this rendering layers will
be applied to the root Render Layer.
So each Render Layer kind of
has a children property, and
it stores the Render Layer as
a linked list, in a stack order.
So the last layer will be
the the first rendered.
We may have hundreds of Render Layers,
it's still not efficient to use
the GPU for hundreds of objects.
And remember,
the GPU is good at rendering many things.
So how does the browser go about that?
Apparently, there is an additional
layer called Graphic Layer,
which is constructed when we
use some 3D acceleration.
So it can be perspective change, or
we use some video element where
we need decoding from the GPU.
And if we try to construct
a Graphic Layer for that, so first,
we'll start with a root Render Layer.
Because it's created by html element,
we initiate the first Graphic Layer,
we need to have at least
one when we load the page.
So for the rest of the rendering layers,
because they do not utilize
any 3D acceleration, we don't actually
need additional rendering layer.
That's why all this rendering layer will
be applied to the one Graphic Layer.
So now we have a Graphic Layer
that has the graphic context and
knows how to draw the rendering layer.
And now we have the full cycle
of how browser renders things.
But let's run a quick demo to
see how this actually works.
So if we open the following CodePen,
and open the debug mode.
Now we need to transition
to the layer step.
>> Evgenii Ray: So we'll see that a single
Graphic Layer right now is created,
and it utilizes 8.7
megabytes of the GPU memory.
So the key thing about Graphic Layers,
we can utilize the Graphic Layer to
optimize certain parts of the apps.
So for instance, you could have the widget
that relies on very advanced animations.
Then you can say, hey, browser,
I want this on a separate Graphic Layer so
you can optimize this widget and
I can see my snappy animation 120 FPS.
But the thing about the Graphic Layer
is it utilizes the CPU and the GPU RAM.
So every time we create
a new Graphic Layer,
we actually take a hit on
the browser resources.
And it's very easy to prove by
applying the styles to the box.
And let's promote each box
through separate Graphic Layer.
So let's say,
>> Evgenii Ray: We
can apply 3D transformation.
And if we go back to the layer step,
we'll see now that we have
five graphic layers in total.
And the first one still
utilizes 8.7 megabytes, but
each newly created one utilizes more than
half megabyte of the virtual memory.
And the problem of that is, imagining you
have at least with hundreds of elements
inside, and you decided to promote
these elements to the Graphic Layer.
This means that you immediately
consume around maybe 100
megabytes of the GPU memory.
And GPU memory is not just used for
the browser and rendering the page,
it's used for the system.
And your application may
become unresponsive because
the system will have to utilize
the additional swap cache.
And when we use the swap, then we
get the unresponsiveness of the app.
So the summary for the Graphic Layers
it's a very powerful thing
to utilize when you build your
complex apps, but you need to
make sure that you utilize it right
because it uses the VRAM and also the CPU.
So instead of optimizing the app you may
end up de-optimizing your application.
>> Speaker 2: Is there any
good rule of thumb for
avoiding CPU bound operations in CSS?
>> Evgenii Ray: There is a website called
what triggers CSS or something, so
you can actually see what is
the pipeline will be triggered by
changing the certain CSS properties,
you just need to make sure.
So its always the rule of thumb,
try and minimize any reflow.
Always try to change the properties
that do not trigger the full pipeline.
So this is the rule of thumb.
There is no good reason to just
always use the full pipeline,
because it always affects
the application performance.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, I found it,
it's csstriggers.com.
>> Evgenii Ray: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: And then Lucas says 8.7
megabits sounds like a lot to me,
am I wrong?
And what could be a good healthy number?
>> Evgenii Ray: No,
actually it's a relatively small number.
Usually websites utilized around hundreds
megabytes of the virtual memory.
And it doesn't grow linear, because we
need to initialize the initial context,
we always pay the price of
this initial utilization.
So it will be kind of the constant.
But if you try to promote too many layers,
then you may have an issue later.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there's
a tweet on about Frontend Masters
that they were watching a course,
and taking notes,
and doing all these things on our website.
And it was taking like one tenth
the resources as another just marketing
page that was just trying to show
a couple animations or whatever.
And how absurd it is,
how people can abuse the CSS engine or
just JavaScript in general,
having so much on the page and
things shifting around, like how
much that it boats up the browser.
>> Evgenii Ray: So it may impact
the performance significantly.
So for instance,
if you have lists of items and
each item will be promoted
to the Graphic Layer,
then I think it will take around
200 megabytes of memory easily.
And we need to remember that the webinar
is consumed mostly by mobile devices,
and when we have the mobile device,
we don't have such benefit.
We don't have RTX 4090 everywhere.
[LAUGH] And that's why we need
to be aware of the layers that
we're utilizing in our app.
Just make sure that you use them wisely.
So for instance, if you have high
activity widget that have using some nice
animation, you can promote
this to the separate layer.
But if you have a static page and
you just promote every element to
the Graphic Layer,
then it's where we can get an issue.
>> Speaker 2: I have heard that CSS
transforms are good optimizations over
reflows.
So, how do we correlate this now given
transforms take a hit on the GPU memory?
>> Evgenii Ray: So it's always
better to utilize GPU than CPU,
because when you utilize CPU you
block the rendering thread and
you will see that your
responsiveness drops.
So if you if you need to choose
what to utilize always utilize GPU.
You need to put a lot of
effort to make sure that
your app is unresponsive because of GPU.
But it's very easy to
make a few mistakes and
then get a frame drop
when you utilize the CPU.